Routing SPI: Default forwarding to the assigned upstream broker (#118)
kroxylicious/design: proposals/118-default-forward-to-assigned-broker.md

            RequestHeaderData header, ApiMessage request, RouterContext context);

    default Map<ApiKeys, String> staticRoutes() { return Map.of(); }
}
```

`staticRoutes()` maps `ApiKeys -> route name`; those keys are forwarded as opaque frames to the
named route, bypassing `onRequest()`. Every other key is dynamically routed. In the current
implementation `onRequest()` is not yet wired, so an API key absent from `staticRoutes()` throws.

## Motivation

Three problems with `staticRoutes()`, drawn from
[kroxylicious#4177](https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/issues/4177):

1. **The useful default was lost.** Before routing, every broker was a virtual endpoint and traffic
   to that endpoint _always_ flowed to the upstream broker it represents (`b0.proxy -> b0.cluster0`,
   `b10000.proxy -> b0.cluster1`). `staticRoutes()` makes a router opt _into_ forwarding by listing
   API keys, instead of inheriting that default.

2. **Scope mismatch.** `staticRoutes()` is a fixed `ApiKeys -> route name` map, but `Router`
   instances are per-connection. A route name cannot express "forward to the broker _this connection_

>    represents" — that target (`virtualNode()`) is only known per connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   instances are per-connection. A route name cannot express "forward to the implied target virtual node" — that target (`virtualNode()`) is derived initially from the connection.
```

I think we have to be careful with the language since we can have a DAG of `Routers` which will see different virtual node id mappings, so Router A may know that virtualNodeId 2 goes to route x and then Router B may see that the request is destined for virtualNodeId 0. A Router knows contextually which virtualNode() is associated with the request.

And also we don't want to suggest that there will always be a 1:1 mapping between a virtual node id and some physical upstream broker, leaving room for future topologies.

Reviewer: I'll resolve, I think the design is comprehensible even if the language isn't perfect

3. **No router can populate the map usefully.** For a pass-through router it means enumerating ~80
   keys; for client-id, subject, or topic routers it is empty or near-empty, because nothing can be
   pinned to a route purely by API key. The map either lists everything (bad DX) or returns `{}`.

## Proposal

Invert the model: the runtime forwards a bound connection's traffic to its assigned broker by

> default; a router declares only what it must **intercept**.

Reviewer: generally for this and the following section I wonder if we should talk about assigned virtual node vs broker.

From each Router's point of view it is aware of VirtualNodes, the connection implies a virtual node, then it's a runtime detail that we can happen to map it 1:1 to a broker. So I wonder if the proposal should use language throughout, rather than baking in this assumption. It's pedantic I know but it might help keep the concepts clear for future readers.

Reviewer: same as other comment, I think the language is good enough

### Route binding is established when the connection is created

A connection reaches the proxy on a specific endpoint — a bootstrap endpoint, or a broker endpoint
for one `(route, broker)`. The runtime binds the connection to that route and builds its upstream
filter chain at connection-creation time, exactly as the non-router proxy already builds a
per-connection pipeline. Two consequences:

* A bound (broker-endpoint) connection's forward target is unambiguous: it already knows its
  `(route, broker)` and filter chain, so `intercepts == false` simply forwards there — no per-request
  route recovery.
* This does **not** require one route per cluster. Two routes fronting the same cluster are two
  distinct endpoints; a connection's route is fixed by the endpoint it arrived on, not by decoding
  the request. The only thing out of scope is a single endpoint representing *several* routes at once
  (070's shared node-id mapping, opt-in via `RouterFactoryContext.allowSharedClusterTargets()`),
  which would require per-request decomposition.

> ### Control plane vs data plane

Reviewer: not quite sure what this section is here for, is it to justify solidifying inclusion of bootstrap and broker-bound endpoints as a Proxy neccessity? Something that should be visible in our APIs, rather than just a convenience. That seems like a good thing to have noted, I don't get the relationship to the plane types.

Author: It was a bad heading. Renamed to `Bootstrap and Node Endpoints`

Kafka makes no protocol distinction between a bootstrap broker and a data broker. The router world
must, because the connection's endpoint is the only signal for whether a default broker exists:

* **bootstrap endpoint** → connection is _unbound_ (`RouterContext.virtualNode()` is empty) → the
  **control plane**: discovery, `METADATA`, coordinator lookup, the routing decisions.
* **broker endpoint** → connection is _bound_ to one `(route, broker)` → the **data plane**:
  data-plane traffic to a known broker.

### The SPI

```java
interface Router {

    /**
     * Whether the router must be invoked for this request. When false the runtime forwards the
     * frame to the connection's assigned broker (virtualNode()) without calling onRequest().
     * Default: intercept only when there is no assigned broker (bootstrap connections).
     */

>     default boolean intercepts(ApiKeys apiKey, RouterContext ctx) {

Reviewer: One idea we had in 070 was to support a richer set of actions here than intercept or forward-to-implicit virtualnode, for example you had your own ideas about forwarding on without implying a decode was required. Tom also speculated about broadcast/multicast possibilities, forwarding the same bytes to different upstreams. I wonder if we should leave the API open for extension towards that. Something like:

``` java
sealed interface RouteAction {
  ...
}

default RouteAction route(ApiKeys apiKey, short apiVersion, RouterContext ctx) {
    if (!ctx.virtualNode().isEmpty()) {
        return RouteAction.FORWARD_TO_IMPLICIT_NODE;
    } else {
        return RouteAction.INTERCEPT;
    }
}
```

In one way I like that this brings the implicit node target language into the API. Currently I don't think it's clear in the Router API javadoc where messages "forwarded to a route" are sent. One hesitation though is that future topologies might not have an implied node target, so adding the language might not extend well to those situations.

In future we could come up with further `RouteActions` like `forwardToNode(VirtualNode node)` implying we don't need to decode the message if we don't need to modify it or use it's contents for routing. Or `multiCastToNodes` and so on.

What do you think of this vs the boolean?

Reviewer 2: YAGNI - I think boolean is good enough for now. I like the symmetry with the filter API too.

Reviewer: sounds good to me, looks like we have consensus about that now. Go ahead with boolean and `should*` style naming.

>     default boolean intercepts(ApiKeys apiKey, RouterContext ctx) {

Reviewer 3: We have `shouldHandle*Request()` and `shouldHandle*Response()` in the filter API, so I think a better name would be `shouldIntercept` or `shouldHandle`.

        return ctx.virtualNode().isEmpty();
    }

> 

Reviewer 4: What was your thinking behind changing the name from the question the runtime asks of filters? From where I'm sitting, this gate is asking the same question as `shouldDecodeRequest` on the filter API — "should the runtime decode this request rather than passing it through as raw bytes?" The proposal already shows it being OR'd into the `DecodePredicate`, which reinforces that it's the same question asked of a different participant.

    /** Called only when intercepts() is true. The router chooses the destination(s). */
    CompletionStage<RouterResponse> onRequest(short apiVersion, ApiKeys apiKey,
            RequestHeaderData header, ApiMessage request, RouterContext ctx);

    default void close() {}
}
```

`onRequest` keeps 070's signature unchanged: an intercepted request is decoded and handed to the
router, and responses fetched via `sendRequest` return decoded (`CompletionStage<ApiMessage>`), as
070 specifies. This proposal changes only the gate.

> **Deferred: request decode depth on the interception path.** A router that intercepts but only needs

Reviewer 2: It's a good point.  If you were making routing decisions based on the client-id, then you could avoid the need to decode the body and route it in its undecoded form.  It is worth raising a separate issue just to register that the idea is come to light.  I'd wait for a use-case before we consider it further.

Author: I didn't get. 

In general, this proposal implementation will solve for client-id based routing as no-decode-needed on non-bootstrap endpoints.

    return filters.shouldDecodeRequest(k, v) || router.intercepts(k, routerCtx);
  }

  // shouldDecodeResponse is unchanged: response decoding is governed by filters and the runtime's
  // node-id translation (kroxylicious#4257), neither of which this proposal touches.
}
```

On a bound (data-plane) connection a router that does not override `intercepts` contributes **zero**
request-decode interest. Reducing what an *intercepted* request must decode is the follow-on
decode-depth work noted above.

### Examples

The four canonical routers form a ramp, and every one relies on the same default gate.

**Static** — front a single cluster. Never intercepts; bootstrap and broker traffic both forward.

```java
class StaticRouter implements Router {
    public boolean intercepts(ApiKeys k, RouterContext ctx) { return false; } // single route, never
    public CompletionStage<RouterResponse> onRequest(...) { throw new AssertionError("unused"); }
}
```

**ClientId-based** — key is in the header; route chosen on the bootstrap connection.

```java
class ClientIdRouter implements Router {
    // on a bound connection, the client-id is already known and the route is fixed; no need to intercept.

>     // dev can additional add `ApiVersionsRequestFilter` or decode ApiVersionRequest to validate clientId once in connection lifetime.

Reviewer 2: I think the implementation is clear.  The comment "on a bound connection, the client-id is already known" didn't really help me understand. 

- It is the bootstrap phase where the client gets routed to the right cluster (`ctx.virtualNode().isEmpty() == true).  They'll get a metadata response containing the brokers of the cluster they are being route to. 
- The client then connects to the node(s) it needs. 
- Bound connections don't need to be routed at all.  `ctx.virtualNode().isEmpty() == false` so no routing takes place.

Author: rephrased the comment.

  represented broker (route ≠ node).
- **`RoutingMode` enum `{PASS_THROUGH, HEADER_ONLY, FULL_MESSAGE}`** — conflates destination with
  decode depth; `PASS_THROUGH` has no destination on bootstrap (so it needs the bound gate anyway).
  Decode depth is deferred to a follow-on proposal in any case.
- **`staticRoute(apiKey, ctx)` / `staticRouteForApiKey(apiKey)` returning a route** — a route is
  cluster-granular, so it can't name the specific represented broker that `sendRequest` (070) targets
  by node; loses leader affinity.

## Open questions

- **Gate naming: `intercepts` vs `requiresDynamicRouting`.** Whichever term wins should be used
  consistently across SPI, metrics, logs, and docs.

## Follow-on work (out of scope here)

- **Request decode depth on the interception path** — a `shouldDecodeRequest`-style declaration so a
  router that routes on the header (client-id, subject) doesn't force a body decode. Separable from
  the gate; deserves its own proposal. (Response-side laziness was considered and dropped: virtual
  node-id translation already decodes the node-reference-bearing responses, `Fetch` included, leaving

>   too narrow a case to justify widening `sendRequest`.)

Reviewer 3: I find the idea appealing, but I'm not sure how feasible it would be given the `RequestData` and `ResponseData` APIs we have. I guess if the root object had a reference to the `ByteBuf` we could, in theory, deserialize progressively only when a called tried to access a struct which hadn't been decoded yet.

   |--- Metadata ----------->|  intercepts (bootstrap): expose ONLY cluster1 brokers
   |<-- Metadata ------------|  (vID c1b0=1, c1b1=3 ; mapping V = id + S*t, S=2)
   |--- Produce (vID 1) ---->|  bound: intercepts==false -> forward to virtualNode()==c1b0
   |--- Fetch  (vID 3) ----->|  bound: intercepts==false -> forward to virtualNode()==c1b1
```

## Affected/not affected projects

- **kroxylicious (runtime):** affected. `staticRoutes()` removed; `Router` gains `intercepts`; the
  dispatch path gains the bound/unbound gate; the `DecodePredicate` is built per connection and
  consults `intercepts`. `onRequest` and `sendRequest` keep their 070 signatures.
- **Router plugin authors:** affected. The no-op default is "forward to the assigned broker," a safe
  and usually-correct starting point.
- **Filter API and existing filter configurations:** not affected.
- **Operator / CRDs:** not affected — SPI/runtime only.

## Compatibility

Proposal [070](./070-routing-api.md) is not yet released, so `staticRoutes()` has no users to break;
this revises an in-flight API. The `routingMode` metric (`static`/`dynamic`) is preserved:

> `intercepts == false` is reported as `static`, `intercepts == true` as `dynamic`.

Reviewer 4: The `static`/`dynamic` metric categories will need revisiting once the SPI settles — I wouldn't block on getting the metric vocabulary right in this proposal.

## Rejected alternatives

- **Keep `staticRoutes()`** — no router can populate it usefully and a route name can't name the
  represented broker (route ≠ node).
- **`RoutingMode` enum `{PASS_THROUGH, HEADER_ONLY, FULL_MESSAGE}`** — conflates destination with
  decode depth; `PASS_THROUGH` has no destination on bootstrap (so it needs the bound gate anyway).
  Decode depth is deferred to a follow-on proposal in any case.
- **`staticRoute(apiKey, ctx)` / `staticRouteForApiKey(apiKey)` returning a route** — a route is
  cluster-granular, so it can't name the specific represented broker that `sendRequest` (070) targets
  by node; loses leader affinity.

## Open questions

- **`intercepts` vs `requiresDynamicRouting` naming.** `intercepts` better describes the gate's real

>   job (the router may intercept to reroute, to fan out, _or_ to rewrite a response without

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I understand the use case for a router rewriting a response. A route has a filter chain — that's where rewriting should occur. If this use case belongs in the filter chain rather than the router, it doesn't work as justification for the `intercepts` name.

  rerouting). `requiresDynamicRouting` aligns with the `routingMode` metric vocabulary. The metric

>   name and method name need not match.

Reviewer 4: I'd push back on "the metric name and method name need not match." We strive for ubiquitous language — the same term should mean the same thing in the SPI, the metrics, the logs, and the docs. If the metric says `dynamic` and the method says `intercepts`, every reader has to mentally translate between two vocabularies. That translation cost compounds across the codebase. We pick one and use it everywhere.

  the request. The only thing out of scope is a single endpoint representing *several* routes at once
  (070's shared node-id mapping, opt-in via `RouterFactoryContext.allowSharedClusterTargets()`),
  which would require per-request decomposition.

### Control plane vs data plane

Kafka makes no protocol distinction between a bootstrap broker and a data broker. The router world
must, because the connection's endpoint is the only signal for whether a default broker exists:

* **bootstrap endpoint** → connection is _unbound_ (`RouterContext.virtualNode()` is empty) → the
  **control plane**: discovery, `METADATA`, coordinator lookup, the routing decisions.
* **broker endpoint** → connection is _bound_ to one `(route, broker)` → the **data plane**:
  data-plane traffic to a known broker.

### The SPI

```java
interface Router {

    /**
     * Whether the router must be invoked for this request. When false the runtime forwards the
     * frame to the connection's assigned broker (virtualNode()) without calling onRequest().
     * Default: intercept only when there is no assigned broker (bootstrap connections).
     */

>     default boolean intercepts(ApiKeys apiKey, RouterContext ctx) {

Reviewer: we should include `short apiVersion` in the signature, allowing for Routers that only need to intercept specific version ranges

Reviewer 2: +1
